# 1 Corinthians 13

Paul discusses the high status of charity—Charity, a pure love, excels and exceeds almost all else.

# 01
THOUGH I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.

# 02
And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.

# 03
And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.

# 04
Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up,

# 05
Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil;

# 06
Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth;

# 07
Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things.

# 08
Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away.

# 09
For we know in part, and we prophesy in part.

# 10
But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.

# 11
When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things.

# 12
For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known.

# 13
And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity.
