# Psalms 115

Our God is in the heavens—Idols are false gods—Trust in the Lord.

# 01
NOT unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake.

# 02
Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is now their God?

# 03
But our God is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he hath pleased.

# 04
Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.

# 05
They have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they, but they see not:

# 06
They have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they smell not:

# 07
They have hands, but they handle not: feet have they, but they walk not: neither speak they through their throat.

# 08
They that make them are like unto them; so is every one that trusteth in them.

# 09
O Israel, trust thou in the LORD: he is their help and their shield.

# 10
O house of Aaron, trust in the LORD: he is their help and their shield.

# 11
Ye that fear the LORD, trust in the LORD: he is their help and their shield.

# 12
The LORD hath been mindful of us: he will bless us; he will bless the house of Israel; he will bless the house of Aaron.

# 13
He will bless them that fear the LORD, both small and great.

# 14
The LORD shall increase you more and more, you and your children.

# 15
Ye are blessed of the LORD which made heaven and earth.

# 16
The heaven, even the heavens, are the LORD's: but the earth hath he given to the children of men.

# 17
The dead praise not the LORD, neither any that go down into silence.

# 18
But we will bless the LORD from this time forth and for evermore. Praise the LORD.
