# Psalms 147

Praise the Lord for His power—His understanding is infinite—He sends His commandments, His word, His statutes, and His judgments unto Israel.

# 01
PRAISE ye the LORD: for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is pleasant; and praise is comely.

# 02
The LORD doth build up Jerusalem: he gathereth together the outcasts of Israel.

# 03
He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds.

# 04
He telleth the number of the stars; he calleth them all by their names.

# 05
Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite.

# 06
The LORD lifteth up the meek: he casteth the wicked down to the ground.

# 07
Sing unto the LORD with thanksgiving; sing praise upon the harp unto our God:

# 08
Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth, who maketh grass to grow upon the mountains.

# 09
He giveth to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which cry.

# 10
He delighteth not in the strength of the horse: he taketh not pleasure in the legs of a man.

# 11
The LORD taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy.

# 12
Praise the LORD, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion.

# 13
For he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates; he hath blessed thy children within thee.

# 14
He maketh peace in thy borders, and filleth thee with the finest of the wheat.

# 15
He sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: his word runneth very swiftly.

# 16
He giveth snow like wool: he scattereth the hoarfrost like ashes.

# 17
He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold?

# 18
He sendeth out his word, and melteth them: he causeth his wind to blow, and the waters flow.

# 19
He sheweth his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel.

# 20
He hath not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they have not known them. Praise ye the LORD.
