# Psalms 19

David testifies, The heavens declare the glory of God, the law of the Lord is perfect, and the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether.

# 01
THE heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork.

# 02
Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge.

# 03
There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.

# 04
Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun,

# 05
Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race.

# 06
His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

# 07
The law of the LORD is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise the simple.

# 08
The statutes of the LORD are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the LORD is pure, enlightening the eyes.

# 09
The fear of the LORD is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the LORD are true and righteous altogether.

# 10
More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold: sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb.

# 11
Moreover by them is thy servant warned: and in keeping of them there is great reward.

# 12
Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.

# 13
Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression.

# 14
Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O LORD, my strength, and my redeemer.
