# Psalms 32

David says, Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity—David acknowledges his sin—He recommends that the righteous be glad in the Lord and rejoice.

# 01
BLESSED is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.

# 02
Blessed is the man unto whom the LORD imputeth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile.

# 03
When I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long.

# 04
For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: my moisture is turned into the drought of summer. Selah.

# 05
I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the LORD; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah.

# 06
For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou mayest be found: surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh unto him.

# 07
Thou art my hiding place; thou shalt preserve me from trouble; thou shalt compass me about with songs of deliverance. Selah.

# 08
I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go: I will guide thee with mine eye.

# 09
Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding: whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto thee.

# 10
Many sorrows shall be to the wicked: but he that trusteth in the LORD, mercy shall compass him about.

# 11
Be glad in the LORD, and rejoice, ye righteous: and shout for joy, all ye that are upright in heart.
