# Psalms 83

God is asked to confound the enemies of His people—Jehovah is the Most High over all the earth.

# 01
KEEP not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God.

# 02
For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lifted up the head.

# 03
They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones.

# 04
They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

# 05
For they have consulted together with one consent: they are confederate against thee:

# 06
The tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites; of Moab, and the Hagarenes;

# 07
Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; the Philistines with the inhabitants of Tyre;

# 08
Assur also is joined with them: they have holpen the children of Lot. Selah.

# 09
Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brook of Kison:

# 10
Which perished at En-dor: they became as dung for the earth.

# 11
Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea, all their princes as Zebah, and as Zalmunna:

# 12
Who said, Let us take to ourselves the houses of God in possession.

# 13
O my God, make them like a wheel; as the stubble before the wind.

# 14
As the fire burneth a wood, and as the flame setteth the mountains on fire;

# 15
So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm.

# 16
Fill their faces with shame; that they may seek thy name, O LORD.

# 17
Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish:

# 18
That men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most high over all the earth.
