# Psalms 88

A prayer of one who feels forsaken and who asks whether the Lord’s loving kindness will be declared in the grave.

# 01
O LORD God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee:

# 02
Let my prayer come before thee: incline thine ear unto my cry;

# 03
For my soul is full of troubles: and my life draweth nigh unto the grave.

# 04
I am counted with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man that hath no strength:

# 05
Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou rememberest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand.

# 06
Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.

# 07
Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou hast afflicted me with all thy waves. Selah.

# 08
Thou hast put away mine acquaintance far from me; thou hast made me an abomination unto them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth.

# 09
Mine eye mourneth by reason of affliction: LORD, I have called daily upon thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee.

# 10
Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? shall the dead arise and praise thee? Selah.

# 11
Shall thy lovingkindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness in destruction?

# 12
Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?

# 13
But unto thee have I cried, O LORD; and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee.

# 14
LORD, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me?

# 15
I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up: while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted.

# 16
Thy fierce wrath goeth over me; thy terrors have cut me off.

# 17
They came round about me daily like water; they compassed me about together.

# 18
Lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness.
