# Psalms 92

A psalm or song for the Sabbath day—Give thanks unto the Lord—His enemies will perish—The righteous will flourish—There is no unrighteousness in the Lord.

# 01
IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the LORD, and to sing praises unto thy name, O most High:

# 02
To shew forth thy lovingkindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night,

# 03
Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the psaltery; upon the harp with a solemn sound.

# 04
For thou, LORD, hast made me glad through thy work: I will triumph in the works of thy hands.

# 05
O LORD, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.

# 06
A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand this.

# 07
When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish; it is that they shall be destroyed for ever:

# 08
But thou, LORD, art most high for evermore.

# 09
For, lo, thine enemies, O LORD, for, lo, thine enemies shall perish; all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.

# 10
But my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I shall be anointed with fresh oil.

# 11
Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies, and mine ears shall hear my desire of the wicked that rise up against me.

# 12
The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree: he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon.

# 13
Those that be planted in the house of the LORD shall flourish in the courts of our God.

# 14
They shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing;

# 15
To shew that the LORD is upright: he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.
